The Fire of Rome AD64: A Firefighter's Perspective
==================================================

This week, Hayden B. takes a look at one of the most infamous events in
the history of the city of Rome: the fire of AD 64! How and why did this
disaster strike? Let's find out...

In July AD 64, Rome burned. It was one of the worst catastrophes in the
city's long history, and although Rome was no stranger to fire, no
previous fire compared to the size and ferocity shown by this disaster.
Tacitus tells us that of the fourteen regions of Rome, only four
remained untouched by the conflagration, and three were completely
destroyed [(Tac. . 15.40.1). How did this
fire](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Tacitus/Annals/15B*.html)
grow to such immense size and ferocity? What factors contributed to its
destructiveness? How did the *vigiles*[^1] attempt to combat such a
merciless inferno?

What is fire?
-------------

Before we can understand how this infamous fire came to be, the question
which may seem completely obvious must first be answered; What, exactly,
is fire? As a volatile oxidation of material that results in a
combustion reaction, fire has shown to need four specific things for it
to exist [@Quintiere : 3]. These are demonstrated in what we call the fire
tetrahedron.

From the perspective of the *vigile*, everything is fuel. The
flammability of that fuel is determined by its material composition
(e.g. wood vs stone) and how fine or small it is (e.g. log vs stick).
Finer fuel made of material with lower ignition temperatures burn more
quickly [@IcoveHaynes : 70]. This would make structures like grain stores,
bakeries, and mills much more explosive due to the flammable dust and
powder within them. Heat is necessary as to induce the oxidation of
nearby materials, which controls the chain reaction required for
sustained combustion. As the word suggests, oxidation requires oxygen to
function. As oxygen is needed in any combustion reaction, it is a
crucial component of fire [@IcoveHaynes : 61].

How does fire spread?
---------------------

Fire spreads through three main pathways - radiation, conduction, and
convection [@Quintiere : 77]. All of them are controlled by the laws of
physics governing heat transfer. Radiation is the ability for heat to
travel outwards from the original source. Conduction occurs in solids
where heat is able to pass through the object, quickly spreading heat
down and through it. Convection in fires works the same as it does for
magma under the mantle. In this case, the gas or liquid near the fire
gets heated. As hot substances are more active and less dense than their
colder counterparts, they begin to rise, before cooling and dropping
again. This pushes very hot gas or liquid into new flammable material,
causing fire to spread despite no physical connection between the two.
These pathways through which fire can spread are limited by the material
the heat passes through and its ability to absorb and transfer heat. The
bigger the fire, the bigger and faster the spread. However, within
confined spaces, another method of fire spreading becomes possible:
pyrolysis [@IcoveHaynes : 70-71].
[Pyrolysis](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BtMmymOxdjc), as evident
from its etymology (*pyro --* fire, and *lysis* -- break down/apart), is
the process whereby burning solids release gases. When these gases are
trapped in confined spaces, they soon can become flammable themselves.
As the gases catch alight (flashover), temperatures rise exponentially,
causing fire to easily spread to areas previously unreachable.

The spread of fire is also dictated by the type and amount of fuel
available, the weather, and topography of the land [@IcoveHaynes :
500-504]. Obviously, if there is a large quantity of flammable material
nearby, a fire will grow and spread much more rapidly than if the fuel
was less abundant or less flammable. Weather controls fire behaviour in
many different ways. The most relevant of these are the temperature,
relative humidity, wind speed, direction, and changes of direction. As
temperature rises, materials and fuels begin to heat, depleting any
moisture within them through evaporation, thus making the material more
susceptible to ignition and fire spread. As relative humidity drops, the
amount of water in the air, too, decreases, dissipating any protection
those droplets may have had against fire [@IcoveHaynes : 502]. Wind works
with fire in a number of ways. Firstly, strong winds can physically push
a fire along its front at a much faster and ferocious manner than
otherwise, as it feeds more oxygen into the combustion reaction.
Secondly, any burning material, such as embers, can be taken up by the
wind and land on a section which would have been previously been safe
from the fire [@IcoveHaynes : 503]. Topography is especially important,
too [@IcoveHaynes : 500]. As a consequence of convection, fire has a
better ability to travel uphill then it does on flat ground or downhill.
In exactly the same conditions, for every 10^o^ angle uphill, a fire
will travel twice the speed.

Setting: Rome AD64\
It's mid-July, the peak of Mediterranean summer, and Rome is sweltering.
As stated earlier, increased temperatures and reduced relative humidity
removes moisture from any material, making it more likely to burn.
Consequently, fighting a fire at this time would have been difficult at
best, catastrophic at worst. Tacitus tells us that wind was present,
most likely the [Scirocco
wind](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iPOf1VBrF-g) from Africa [@Byles :
78], which probably had a great effect in the spread of the fire [(Tac.
*Ann*.
15.38.2)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Tacitus/Annals/15B*.html).
Even today, the hot, dry, and forceful winds of the Scirocco is heavily
associated with heat waves and dangerous fire conditions.

The city of Rome is famed for its seven hills upon which it grew. The
city has been moulded around this topography, and even writer's such as
Pliny cannot describe the city without mentioning them [(Plin. *NH.*
3.66-67)](https://sourcebooks.fordham.edu/ancient/pliny-natihist-rome.asp).
As iconic as the hills may be, they make fire a much more real and
dangerous prospect within Rome.

Buildings and materials
-----------------------

Most of the buildings in Rome during the time of the fire were either
destroyed in the blaze, or thereafter. This leaves us with minimal
information on the way structures were built at the time. Luckily, the
sites of Herculaneum and Pompeii can give clarity in this situation.
Being 'frozen' in time from the eruption in AD79, buried under a
pyroclastic flow and surge, respectively, these sites demonstrate the
popular building materials and techniques used in the late republican
and early imperial periods. The finding of preserved wood, such as in
the House of the Relief of Relephus in 2009, prompted an investigation
into the wooden ceiling panels [@Macchionietal : 1024-1037]. It also
showed that Roman buildings had large amounts of wood within their
structure, making them much more susceptible to the ignition and spread
of fire.

Origins of the fire
-------------------

The recounts of Tacitus, Cassius Dio, and Suetonius all differ on the
origins of the fire. The latter two believed Nero ordered the
destruction and consequent plundering of the city through his soldiers
[(Cass. Dio.
62.16.2-3)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/e/roman/texts/cassius_dio/62*.html).
Tacitus, however, is far more specific. He states that it occurred in
the "Circus which adjoins the Palatine and Caelian Hills... among shops"
[(Tac. *Ann*.
15.38.2)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Tacitus/Annals/15B*.html).
His specificity and lack of blame on Nero, amongst other reasons, gives
credibility to his assertion and, perhaps, can be considered a more
reliable account. This will be discussed below.

Expansion of the fire[\
]{.underline}The shops that Tacitus mentioned as the genesis of the fire
are incredibly important. Due to the abundance of 'merchandise' within
them, the fuel readily available to it from the start, combined with the
strong wind allowed for the fire to quickly engulf the entire circus
(region XI). Given its proximity to the origin point, and the
inclination to the hill, it is reasonable to assume that the royal
palace on the Palatine (region X) was also one of the first to go up.

Once the fire had passed the circus, the fire soon found the
overburdened, narrow, and irregular streets of Rome [(Tac. *Ann*.
15.38.3)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Tacitus/Annals/15B*.html).
Being so close together, the buildings allowed easy transfer of fire
between them, and even Tacitus remarks on how quickly the fire spread
[(Tac. *Ann*.
15.38.5)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Tacitus/Annals/15B*.html).
Although Tacitus does not give us a direction of the fire, he sets up
some important boundaries. He says that the fire was put out at the foot
of the Esquiline Hill (Region V) and that Nero opened up the Campus
Martius to the displaced populace [(Tac. *Ann*.
15.39-40)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Tacitus/Annals/15B*.html).
The structures that he mentions that burned can also be used to deduct
the direction and behaviour of the fire [(Tac. *Ann*.
15.41.1)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Tacitus/Annals/15B*.html).
These can be traced to the Aventine Hill (Region XIII), *Forum Boarium*
(Near *Porta Flumentana*), and *Forum Romanum* (Region VIII). As all of
these are west of the ignition spot, an Easterly wind can be deduced as
highly likely, at-least in the early stages of the fire. The fact that
the fire eventually spread North East to the Esquiline Hill means that
either a wind change occurred sometime during the fire, or regardless of
the wind, the sheer amount of fuel allowed the fire to travel against
the wind. Either way, it shows a characteristically dangerous fire which
would have been near impossible to put out.

Firefighting efforts
--------------------

Given how quickly the fire spread, and the chaotic conditions created by
panic, the conditions were set against the *vigiles* from the start.
This leaves the firefighters little options in order to contain the
fire. Even with our technology today, fires over 1.5 - 2 m in height are
deemed too big for a direct attack. This leaves only defensive options.
The biggest way to set up a defensive perimeter is by removing the fuel
between the fire and that boundary. As structures were the fuel in this
instance, that is what had to be removed through either demolishing them
or by burning them down in a controlled manner. As recounts from all
three authors include men, acting under authority, as purposefully
destroying buildings by demolition or with fire. Although damning in
their report of this activity, the removal of the structures would have
been vital in the containment of the blaze. Considering that we know
that the Esquiline and Campus Martius were spared from complete damage,
it is logical to deduce that the back-burning and firefighting
operations were centred on these areas. The use of firebreaks like the
Servian wall would have acted like control lines for the firefighters,
as they knew it would be their best chance at stopping the fire from
spreading. Luckily enough, the plan seemed to have worked as the control
lines held, protecting the Campus Martius, where Nero housed the
displaced populace, and the where the original blaze was extinguished at
the foot of the Esquiline Hill [(Tac. *Ann.*
15.40.1)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Tacitus/Annals/15B*.html).

**Figures**

![](media/image1.jpg){width="2.640972222222222in"
height="3.3583333333333334in"}

Figure 1: The Fire of Rome by Hubert Robert, 1787.

![](media/image2.png){width="2.5868055555555554in"
height="2.490972222222222in"}

Figure 2: Fire Tetrahedron

![](media/image3.jpeg){width="3.6951388888888888in"
height="3.6395833333333334in"}

Figure 3: Map of Rome depicting the Hills and Servian Wall

![](media/image4.png){width="6.25in" height="4.986111111111111in"}

Figure 4: Map of Rome showing the Regions and walls of Rome.\
Originally made by fr:User:ColdEel & edited by nl:Gebruiker:Joris;
modified by H. Bayne

![](media/image6.png){width="2.640972222222222in"
height="0.7180555555555556in"}

**Further Reading:**

-   Fires of Rome:

    -   Rubin, L. (2004), *De Indenddis Urbis Romae: The Fires of Rome
        in Their Urban Context,* PhD Thesis, State University of New
        York.

    -   Closs, V. M. (2013), *While Rome Burned: Fire Leadership, and
        Urban Disaster in the Roman Cultural Imagination,* PhD Thesis,
        University of Pensylvania.

-   Fire Behaviour and Principles:

    -   Sundén, B. & Faghri, M. (2008), *Transport Phenomena in Fires,*
        WIT Press, Cambridge.

    -   Bergman, T. L., Lavine, A. S., Incropera, F. P., Dewitt, D. P.
        (2011), *Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer,* 7^th^ ed.,
        John Wiley and Sons, United States of America.

-   *Vigiles *

    -   Rainbird, J. S. (1986), "Fire Stations of Imperial Rome",
        *Papers of the British School at Rome,* vol. 54, pp. 147-69.

    -   Fuhrmann, C. (2005), *Keeping the imperial peace: Public Order,
        state control and policing in the Roman Empire during the first
        three centuries AD,* PhD Thesis, University of North Carolina.

**Bibliography:**

**Ancient Sources**

-   Cassius Dio, *Roman History,* Translated by B. Thayer, From
    <http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/e/roman/texts/cassius_dio/62*.html>

-   Pliny the Elder, *Natural History*, Translated by W. S Davis, from
    <https://sourcebooks.fordham.edu/ancient/pliny-natihist-rome.asp>

-   Suetonius, *Life of Nero,* 38. Translated by
    <http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=urn:cts:latinLit:phi1348.abo016.perseus-eng1:38>

-   Tacitus, *Annals*, 15.40.2. Translated by A. J. Woodman. Hackett
    Publishing Company. Indianapolis, Chicago. 2004

**Modern Sources\
**

-   Quintiere, J. G., *Principles of Fire Behavior*, 2^nd^ ed., 2017

-   Icove, D. J., Haynes, G. A., *Kirk's Fire Investigation*, 8^th^ ed.,
    2018

-   Byles, R., *Fire and its consequences in the city of Rome in
    antiquity, 390BC -- AD410,* PhD thesis, University of Wales, 2013

-   Macchioni, N., Pizzo, B., Pecoraro, E., Sozzi, L., Lazzeri, S. 'New
    Wooden Archaeological Finds from Herculaneum: The State of
    Preservation and Hypothesis of Consolidation of the Material from
    the House of the Relief of Telephus' in *Archaeometry,* vol
    58(6). 2015. pp. 1024-37

**Modern Sources in Bibtex:**

[@book{Quintiere,\
title = {Principles of Fire Behavior, 2nd Edition},

author = {James G. Quintiere},

year = {2017},

month = {09},

isbn = {ISBN-10: 1498735649}

}

[@book{IcoveHaynes,\
title = {Kirk\'s Fire Investigation, 8th Edition},

author = {David Icove and Gerald Haynes},

year = {2017},

month = {10},

isbn = {ISBN-13: 978-0134237923}

}

Cannot find Byles

[@article{Macchionietal,

author = {Macchioni, N. and Pizzo, B. and Capretti, C. and Pecoraro, E.
and Sozzi, L. and Lazzeri, S.},

title = {New Wooden Archaeological Finds from Herculaneum: The State of
Preservation and Hypothesis of Consolidation of the Material from the
House of the Relief of Telephus},

journal = {Archaeometry},

volume = {58},

number = {6},

pages = {1024-1037},

keywords = {waterlogged archaeological wood, chemical characterization,
physical characterization, roman roof, ft--ir},

doi = {10.1111/arcm.12213},

url = {https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/arcm.12213},

eprint = {https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/arcm.12213},

abstract = {This paper deals with the description of the analysis
performed to characterize the state of preservation of the wooden
artefacts recently discovered at the site of Herculaneum, Italy. During
2009, several wooden artefacts were brought to light during maintenance
work at Herculaneum. They were attributed to both the roofing elements
and the ceiling of the House of the Relief of Telephus. The roof was
found mainly disassembled; nevertheless, it was an extraordinary
archaeological find, because it represents a unique vestige of a Roman
roof and, moreover, the aspect of both the structural and the decorative
panels, where portions of the original polychrome decoration and traces
of gilding were still preserved, appeared almost intact. Within the
framework of the Herculaneum Conservation Project, a diagnostic study
was undertaken to characterize the state of preservation of the wood
constituting the roof, and also including the decorated panels of the
ceiling, in order to determine a consolidation process able to
structurally support the decayed wood without damaging the residual
polychrome decoration. The results of the micromorphological, chemical
and physical characterization of the wood, as a combined diagnostic
process, are reported. A first proposal of a possible consolidation
methodology based on the analytical results is also suggested.}

}

**Images\
**

Figure 1:

Hubert Robert, *The Fire of Rome,* Painting, 1787,\
Wikimedia Commons, (2015), accessed on 20 September 2018,

\<<https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fire_in_Rome.jpg>\>

Licence: Public Domain

Figure 2:\
Gustavb, *Fire Tetrahedron,* 2006,\
Wikimedia Commons, (2006), accessed on 20 September 2018,\
\<<https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fire_tetrahedron.svg>\>

Licence: Public Domain

Figure 3:

William Smith, *The Student's manual of ancient geography, based upon
the Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography,* 1861,\
Wikimedia Commons, (2015), accessed on 20 September 2018,
\<<https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:The_student's_manual_of_ancient_geography,_based_upon_the_Dictionary_of_Greek_and_Roman_geography_(1861)_(14768984432).jpg>\>

Licence: Flikr API, No known copywrite restrictions

Figure 4:

[fr:User:ColdEel](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:ColdEel) & edited
by [nl:Gebruiker:Joris](https://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gebruiker:Joris),
*Servian wall on a map of ancient Rome around 300AD,* edited by Hayden
Bayne, 2018,\
Accessed on 20 September 2018,\
\<<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Plan_Rome-_Servische_Muur.png>\>

Licence: Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported

[^1]: Firefighters
