---
layout: post
cover: '/assets/images/Ewan/Baltard_1837_pompey_pompey.png'
caption: 'A drawing by Baltard of the remains of the Theatre of Pompey as they were in 1837'
captionLink: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/32/Baltard_1837_pompey.png
title: "Nice theatre, but didn't they kill Caesar here?"
date: 2018-10-27 16:00:00
tags:
 - rome
 - archaeology
 - pompeius Magnus
 - theatre of pompey
category:
 - post
author: ewan
---

Apollo & Rome: Snapshot of a God
=================================

*This week, we have a double episode! Zac Roberts and Patrick Brewer
both discuss the presence of arguably the most important Hellenic god in
Rome; Apollo. But how did a Greek god become a naturalized Roman? Let's
take a look at Apollo's presence in Rome, both physically and
conceptually.*

Gods are extremely interesting historical figures; they paradoxically
both exist, yet do not physically exist, while their worship is
subjective to geography and time. One such god is Apollo. Brought into
Rome during the 5th Century BC, Apollo was absorbed into the Roman
Pantheon by a process called [*interpretation
Romana*](http://www.oxfordreference.com/abstract/10.1093/acref/9780199534043.001.0001/acref-9780199534043-e-4824?rskey=ttkVxJ&result=2080)[^1]
[@Darvill]. Such a process can be seen in the affiliation between Jupiter
and Zeus, or Mars and Ares. *Interpretatio Romana* began with the
adoption of the Greek deity, including associated origin stories and
myths, followed by identification of the pre-existing Roman deities that
more closely corresponded to the newer Greek one. However, what makes
the case of Apollo curious is that he had no direct Roman equivalent; he
was simply adopted along with the Greek notions of how he should be
depicted. The final stage of the *interpretation Romana* was the
codifying of the god into the Roman system. With the origins of Rome
itself being rooted in the Trojan War and Aeneas, Greece played a major
role in early Roman tradition.

Held in great esteem and worship, Apollo was the Greek and Roman god of
music, oracles, archery, medicine and the sun. Apollo's origins are
described in the Homeric ['Hymn to
Apollo'](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Aabo%3Atlg%2C0013%2C003%3A151),
which states that Apollo was the son of Zeus and Leto. Furthermore,
Homer highlights that, upon being given nectar and ambrosia, the infant
Apollo grows into an adult and proclaims, "The Lyre and curved bow shall
ever be dear to me, and I will declare to men the unfailing will of
Zeus" ([Hymn. Hom. Ap.
131](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0138%3Ahymn%3D3%3Acard%3D131)).
Thus, the lyre and curved bow became symbols associated with Apollo,
often appearing beside him in depictions in art, sculpture and even
coinage.

Romans commonly used mythology to identify themselves with certain
ancestral lineages; for example, the Roman poet, Virgil, reinforces
Aeneas' backstory and reflects upon Julius Caesar's claim to being
descended from Venus through Aeneas ([Virgil, *Aeneid*,
1.254](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0054%3Abook%3D1%3Acard%3D254)).
As Caesar's adopted son, Augustus would have therefore also claimed
descendancy from Venus. However, Augustus seems to have had a deep
affinity to Apollo, and often used his association with the god during
military campaigns to grand himself divine protection [@Zanker], as we
shall see further on.

By the age of Augustus, Apollo had grown from a foreign god into one of
Rome's most important deities. Yet, how do we know this? We can't ask
Apollo. Instead, we must track him through his impact on the city.
Apollo was portrayed in Rome in many forms including temples, statues
and figurines. He had two temples in the actual city of Rome, the
changes of which permit us to trace Apollo's evolution in Rome; his
gaining prominence may have had a large impact on these changes.

The Temple of Apollo Medicus
=============================

The first major temple to Apollo in Rome was actually located outside
the city itself, in the *Campus Martius*[^2]. Likely, this temple was
built at the site that a cult statue of Apollo was reported to have shed
tears for three days after the death of Scipio the Younger ([Dio,
22.84.2](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/22-29*.html))
It is significant that a religious temple built to a god had to be built
outside pomerium, Rome's religious city line. This was due to the fact
that, at this time, Apollo was seen as a foreign god and thus unable to
house a temple within Rome [@Hill: 126]. According to [Livy (*History of
Rome*
4.25.3)](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0026%3Abook%3D4%3Achapter%3D25),
construction of the temple was begun in 433 BC after a plague swept
through Rome. It is for this reason that the temple became known as
Apollo Medicus, the doctor.


However, while the origin of this temple is important, it is it's
restoration that is far more interesting. The temple of Apollo Medicus
stood for several centuries, the passing of which left its mark on the
building. Eventually, in 32 BCE, the temple was restored by the consul,
C. Sosius, thus the Temple of Apollo Medicus was often described by the
epithet *Sosianus*. Sosius began building the temple just prior to
Octavian's battle with Antony for supremacy in Rome, the latter of whom
he supported. However, after Antony's defeat, Augustus seems to have
forgiven Sosius for not supporting him, giving Sosius the time to
continue with the temple's restoration [@JV99]. Augustus claimed
divinity from Apollo, and it is possible that restoring this temple
restored Sosius in Augustus' eyes.

Very little of the temple remains today, with only three columns
remaining. However many fragments from the pediment have been found and
reconstructed. We know much from Pliny the Elder. The art that decorated
this restored temple was Greek in nature, with paintings and statues
from Aristides of Thebes and Philiscus of Rhodes [(Plin. *Nat Hist.*
35.6)](http://perseus.uchicago.edu/perseus-cgi/citequery3.pl?dbname=PerseusLatinTexts&getid=1&query=Plin.%20Nat.%2035.6),
as well as a cedar statue; this was have reinforced Apollo as a foreign
god. Of the two statues attributed to Philiscus, Pliny emphasises that
the second was nude, while the coin evidence, as discussed by Hill,
suggests that the first was the cult-statue [@Hill: 125-142]. It is
similar in nature to the late fifth century coins minted by Croton (fig.
3), which depict Apollo taking aim at a python, for example, and will be
discussed below.

Hill comes to the conclusion that the cult statue of Apollo in the
Temple of Apollo Medicus represented the god holding a laurel branch in
one hand, with the other leaning on a lyre; symbols often repeated on
Apollo/Augustan coinage. This depiction is consistent with the
Hellenised view of Apollo in Rome, that of Greek mythological aspects
being combined with specific Roman symbolism.

This temple is often overshadowed by grandeur and beauty of the Temple
of Apollo Palatinus, situated on the Palatine Hill, yet, without it, our
knowledge of Apollo prior to Augustus would be greatly diminished.

The Temple of Apollo Palatinus
==============================

Apollo remained a minor foreign god in the eyes of the Romans for
centuries. It was not until Augustus that this status began to change.
Augustus prayed to Apollo during his campaigns, crediting the god for
his many victories. Such examples included that over Mark Antony and
Cleopatra at Actium, a battle which was incidentally fought under a
shrine to Apollo, and that over Sextus Pompeius at Naulochus in
September of 36 BC. It was after the latter victory that Augustus is
famed to have vowed to construct a temple in Apollo's honour [@Hill:
131], recorded on the Res Gestae (19) and by [Marcus Velleius
Paterculus](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Velleius-Paterculus)
([Roman History,
2.81.3](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/e/roman/texts/velleius_paterculus/2c*.html))
, who wrote that:

> *Caesar, on his victorious return to the city, made the announcement
> that he meant to set apart for public use certain houses which he had
> secured by purchase through his agents in order that there might be a
> free area about his own residence. He further promised to build a
> temple of Apollo with a portico about it, a work which he constructed
> with rare munificence.*

Construction of the temple was started the same year and dedicated on
9th of October, 28 BC [@Hill: 130].

This second temple to Apollo was built on the Palatine Hill, a place
connected with Augustus' residence, in the exact spot where lightning
had struck the hill and was therefore public property. This lightning
strike was declared by the *haruspices*[^3] to mean that it was desired
by Apollo [(Suet. *Aug.*
29.3)](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Suetonius/12Caesars/Augustus*.html).
Thus, the temple was known as Apollo Palatinus. Sources often mention
its location in relation to Romulus' hut, finding it appropriate that
the home of the second founder of Rome was near that of the first [@Hill: 131].

The Apollo Palatinus is credited as one of Augustus' most magnificent
building projects. Propertius describes a large temple of white Luna
marble ([Prop. *Eleg.*
2.31](https://www.poetryintranslation.com/PITBR/Latin/PropertiusBkTwo.php#anchor_Toc201112288)),
built either in prostyle hexastyle, or peripteral and octastyle
([Virgil, A,
8.671](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0054%3Abook%3D8%3Acard%3D671)),
with portraits of Apollo's sun chariot on the roof. The doors were
decorated with gold and ivory reliefs of Delphi and Niobids, both sacred
to Apollo. Pliny the Elder [(*Nat. Hist.*
36.4)](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Plin.+Nat.+36.4&fromdoc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0137)
describes the entrance to the temple being a marble statue of Apollo
with an altar surrounded by the four oxen of Myron where sacrifices
would be held. The inner chamber of the temple contained a statue of
Apollo by Scopas and one of Diana by Timotheus, for worshippers to pray
before [(Plin. *Nat. Hist.*
36.4)](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Plin.+Nat.+36.4&fromdoc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0137).
Golden gifts and jewels were placed in the temple by Augustus for
majesty. The temple was large enough to accommodate both the senate and
*quindecemviri*[^4]. Both colleges would hold meetings in the temple on
occasions, a tradition that continued for the next few centuries.

However, this description of the Temple of Apollo Palatinus is
indirectly challenged by archaeologist Stephan Zink, who states that
"despite its fundamental importance for early Augustan temple design,
the architecture of the temple of *Apollo in Patio* remains notoriously
unknown" [@Zink: 47]. This is because the temple, in its current state
of preservation, is little more than the foundations and scattered
blocks. There have been several attempts to reconstruct it, yet none
have been overwhelmingly accepted by the archaeological community as no
explanation can be of any real value unless it can be corroborated by
the archaeological evidence.


Whereas Apollo's original temple focused on him as a god of medicine,
Apollo's second temple emphasised his prophetic nature. This can be seen
by the placing of the Sibylline books by Augustus underneath the statue
of Apollo. These were a set of oracular books from the Roman kingdom
which contained prophecies for the future of Rome. The Sibylline books
had previously resided in the Temple of Jupiter Capitalinus, the most
important temple in Rome [@Hill: 133]; thus, by moving them to Temple of
Apollos, Augustus also transferred some of Jupiter's authority to
Apollo.

Another way in which Augustus changed the nature of Apollo was in
regards to the *ludi saeculares.*[^5] The games marked the end of a
*saeculum*, a period of 110 years, the longest a human could live. The
Temple of Apollo Palatinus was a key part of the celebrations with
processions and sacrifices being held there. These games continued to
occur until the rise of Christian emperors, ensuring that Apollo would
remain on the same tier of worship as that of Jupiter, Mars, and
Minerva.

This continual use of the temple by the senate and for the *ludi
saeculares* can be seen as Augustus' way of legitimizing and reinforcing
his right to rule over Rome. The temple stood as a reminder of his
victory at Actium and his semi-divine status, while the addition of the
Sibylline books also linked Apollo to the future of Rome. In short,
Apollo had become the paragon of power in Rome through the Temple of
Apollo Palatinus, and would remain as such long after the Augustan age.

Numismatic Evidence: Apollo & Augustus - Father and Son?
========================================================

Whilst Apollo had only two temples in Rome, his exposure to the city and
the empire was far more widespread. Augustus was not the first ruler of
Rome to link himself familiarly to a god, yet was the first to do so
with Apollo. He believed Apollo to be the reason that he became emperor
of Rome and, subsequently, claimed to be a son of the god [@Hill: 129].
In order to ensure that the empire knew of his lucrative lineage,
Augustus used a method of political propaganda that is still continued
today: coinage. These coins, although not directly linked to Apollo's
temples, are the only other physical evidence we have to observe Apollo
in Rome. Through them we are given an insight into the way in which the
majority of Romans would be familiar with the god, as father to the most
powerful mortal in the world.

Coins from the Republic often depict the Laureate head of Apollo, as
seen in figure 6. Furthermore, examples of the Laureate head of Apollo
and Apollo in a quadriga, holding a bow and arrow in one hand and a
laurel branch in the other, can be found on the Coinage of the Roman
Republic Online collection ([RRC
26/2](http://numismatics.org/crro/id/rrc-26.2),
[236/1b](http://numismatics.org/crro/id/rrc-236.1b)). The association
between Apollo and the laurel branch is one that has been brought from
Greek mythology, symbolising victory and honour.

Other coins from the same period depict a young male head that has been
identified as possibly being Apollo, wearing an oak wreath ([RRC
304/1](http://numismatics.org/crro/id/rrc-304.1)). This has been
augmented by evidence of a later coin which depicts a clearly
recognisable Apollo wearing an oak wreath with a small thunderbolt below
([RRC 350A/1c](http://numismatics.org/crro/id/rrc-350A.1c)). Oak
wreaths, or Corona's, are a distinctly Roman symbol. While it is hard to
tell from the coin what style of oak wreath is being worn by Apollo, the
[*corona
civica*](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0137%3Abook%3D16%3Achapter%3D5)
is a possible option ([Plin. *Nat. Hist.*
16.5](http://perseus.uchicago.edu/perseus-cgi/citequery3.pl?dbname=LatinAugust2012&getid=1&query=Plin.%20Nat.%2016.5)).

Depictions of Apollo on coins from the Roman Empire often portray the
god standing up holding a lyre ([RIC I, 2^nd^ Ed. Augustus
190A](http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.1(2).aug.190A)). Many of these
coins date to the period of Augustus and often have the Emperor's head
depicted on the reverse. This again highlights the association between
the Emperor and Apollo.

The Lyre is a common icon attached to Apollo on both coins and statues,
symbolism borne throughout the republic to empire. A coin dating to the
rule of Hadrian has a depiction of Apollo standing with a raven in one
hand and a branch in the other ([RIC II Hadrian
484](http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.2.hdn.484)). Another from the
later empire shows Apollo seated, holding an olive branch ([RIC V
Carausius 197](http://numismatics.org/ocre/id/ric.5.cara.197)).

Through these coins, it is interesting to see how a distinctly Greek god
can be made Roman, and to have the mix between Greek and Roman symbolism
combined in such a public way is poignant.

Apollo & Rome: Sweet Memoires
=============================

Unlike many of Rome's major gods, such as Jupiter, Minerva, and Mars,
Apollo only had two temples in Rome. Yet these two temples tell us much
about Apollo in Rome. The Temple of Apollo Sosianus reflects that, while
Apollo was a very Roman god by the time of Augustus, his Greek ancestry
was important; this evident as Sosius' restoration "doubled down" on
Apollo's Greek heritage. Through Apollo's dual citizenship, so to speak,
we see that, even in the same city, gods can reflect different natures.
The Temple of Apollo Palatinus provides insight on Apollo's relationship
with Augustus and how he paved the way for the Roman Empire. It is
interesting to note that, in history, the characters responsible for the
most influential changes in a society are commonly a mythological.
Apollo is no different, though, through the works left behind, we are
able to gain a snapshot into how the Romans viewed this titanic god.

The concept of a Hellenic Apollo in the city of Rome is fascinating, and
I hope that this blog post opens opportunity for further discussion
regarding the introduction of Hellenic deities, such as Cybele/Magna
Mater as previously mentioned, to the City of Rome.

Further Reading
===============

[Hill, The Temples and Statues of Apollo in Rome", *The Numismatic
Chronicle and Journal of the Royal Numismatic
Society*](https://www.jstor.org/stable/42662641?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents)

[JV99, The Temple of Apollo Medicus Sosianus: Restoration under
Augustus, University of
Kent](https://blogs.kent.ac.uk/lucius-romans/2017/06/13/the-temple-of-apollo-medicus-sosianus-restoration-and-politics-under-augustus/)

Bibliography
============


[^1]: The identification and association of barbarian gods with deities
    in the Roman Pantheon.

[^2]: The Campus Martius was an area of publicly owned land outside the
    city, stretching over 2 square kilometres.

[^3]: A haruspex, plural haruspice, was trained to practice haruspicy, a
    type of divination done through the inspection of the entrails of
    sacrificed animals.

[^4]: Those in charge of sacred rites

[^5]: The Secular Games, a Roman religious celebration revived by
    Augustus in 17 BC.
