Religion and Power: The Julio-Claudian Quindecemviri
====================================================

Introduction
------------

The *Quindecemviri Sacris Faciundis* (*XVVIRI S. F.* in inscriptions)
was a very important priesthood in Ancient Rome. Translated as the
'board of fifteen for the performance of sacred rites' (short and to the
point as always...), the college was one of the four great priestly
colleges. Dionysius of Halicarnassus ([Dion.
4.62](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Dionysius_of_Halicarnassus/4C*.html#62.4))
claims that the college consisted of two members under the last king
Tarquinius (535-509 BCE), referred to as the *duumviri sacrorum*. This
number rose to ten in the early-Republic (*decemviri sacris faciundis*),
and then again to fifteen in the late-Republic (*quindecemviri sacris
faciundis*). The body also annually elected two 'heads' of the college.

Throughout much of Roman History, the *quindecemviri* had a number of
religious roles, but their main duty was to care for and interpret the
'Sibylline books': a collection of oracular utterances which were
consulted for prophecies in times of crisis. It was based upon a reading
of these books that the *quindecemvir* Lucius Cotta supposedly
prophesised that Parthia could only be conquered by a king ([Suet. Jul.
79](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Suetonius/12Caesars/Julius*.html)).
A prophesy that would prove fatal for a certain Gaius Julius Caesar...

During the reign of the Julio-Claudian dynasty (the first five emperors
who ruled from 27 BCE -- 68 CE, fig. 1), Rome underwent a range of
societal changes. Society transformed as the Empire transitioned from
semi-democratic republic to a monarchy. Necessitated by this transition,
the religion of Ancient Rome underwent as series of changes as well.
Understanding the *quindecemviri* during this period is therefore of
great significance. Who were the men in this powerful religious college?
What was their role? What was their relationship with the emperors?

Who were they? 
---------------

By 17 BCE, as recorded in an inscription recounting Augustus' *ludi
saeculares* (an important festival supposedly celebrated every 100-110
years), the so-called 'board of fifteen' was more like the 'board of
twenty-one' (*Acta ludorum saecularium*, fig. 2)*.* In fact, while the
*Acta* lists 21 members, scholars such as Martha Hoffman
[(1953](https://www.jstor.org/stable/292139)) have noted that there may
have been more, with some members omitted because they were not present
in Rome at the time. The *quindecemviri* was probably bolstered to this
large size when Augustus enlarged other colleges in 30 BCE ([Dio Cass.
51.20](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/51*.html)).
Despite all of this, the body retained the name *quindecemviri sacris
faciundis*.

The men who constituted this now enlarged body were evidently some of
the most illustrious men of their day, men who had typically seen very
successful political, military and religious careers. Illustrating this
point, a recent study of 59 inscriptions dating to the Julio-Claudian
period conducted by the [*Interpreters of the Sibyl
Project*](https://researchers.mq.edu.au/en/projects/the-interpreters-of-the-sibyl-the-xvviri-and-the-city-of-rome)
found that of the 47 named *quindecemviri*, only 3 had never has a term
as consul or consul suffect, the most important magisterial positions in
Rome (fig. 3).

To illuminate this point further, several *quindecemviri* were members
of the Julio-Claudian Emperors' inner circles. Cossus Cornelius Lentulus
Gaeticliucs, a *quindecemvir* under Augustus and Tiberius (23 BCE -- 37
CE), was a personal drinking companion of Tiberius. The historian Seneca
([Sen. Epp.
83.15](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Moral_letters_to_Lucilius/Letter_83))
even records that it was during one of their many drinking sessions that
Cornelius was promoted to Urban Prefect (an important magisterial
position). Several Julio-Claudian Emperors and members from the imperial
household were themselves also members of the priesthood. In the
aforementioned *Acta ludorum saecularium* Augustus and his close
companion Marcus Agrippa are recorded as the two heads of the college,
and were charged with the curation of the *Ludi Saeculares* (17 BCE).
The emperors possibly wanted the priesthood to have (even) more of a say
in important religious matters. Indeed, it is Tiberius (14-37 CE) who
rejects Gaius Asinius Gallus' proposition to consult the Sibylline books
about the flooding of the Tiber ([Tac. Ann.
1.76](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Tacitus/Annals/1E*.html)).

Many of the Julio-Claudian *quindecemviri* also held a range of
socio-political, military and religious posts before and after their
admission into the priesthood. Lucius Caninius Gallus, for example, was
one of the three *triumvir monetalis* (board of moneyers) in 12 BCE,
minting a number of issues (found
[here](http://numismatics.org/ocre/results?q=issuer_facet%3A%22L.+Caninius+Gallus%22)),
such as RIC I^2^ 416 (fig. 4). While probably not a *quindecemvir* in 12
BCE, he definitely was by 1-10 CE when he became Proconsul (Governor) of
the province of Africa, for the religious office is recorded on an
inscription from Leptis Magna ([IRT
521](http://db.edcs.eu/epigr/epi_ergebnis.php)). In 15 CE Caninius is
also made one of the five *curatores riparum et alvei Tiber* (curators
of the banks and channel of the Tiber river). Interestingly, the
engineer Frontius records another *quindecemvir*, Aulus Didius Gallus,
serving in a similar body in the 40s CE ([Front. Aq.
2.102](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Frontinus/De_Aquis/text*.html)).
Instead of looking after the Tiber, Didius was a *curatores aquarum*, or
'curator of the aqueducts', thus overseeing the maintenance of the
Rome's ever important water sources.

While today in modern Australia we would have an issue with a federal
minister concurrently being an active general, state premier, and
religious leader, the Romans evidently would not.

Roles of the Quindecemviri under the Julio-Claudians
----------------------------------------------------

Now we know who they were, it is time to explore what they actually did.
As mentioned, the primary role of the *quindecemviri* was to care for
and interpret the Sibylline books, and the Julio-Claudian
*quindecemviri* were no different. As mentioned, Gaius Asinius Gallus
proposed to consult the Sibylline books during the reign of Tiberius,
and was rejected by the Emperor ([Tac. Ann.
1.76](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Tacitus/Annals/1E*.html#note13)).
What is important to note is that this proposition was made in the
senate, and to the emperor Tiberius, indicating that that this may have
been required of the Julio-Claudian *quindecemviri*. A certain Lucius
Caninus Galllus is indeed recorded to have made a proposition to edit
the Sibylline books to the senate and Tiberius, and on this occasion the
*quindecemvir* was more successful, being told to discuss the matter
with his fellow *quindecemviri* ([Tac. Ann.
6.12](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Tacitus/Annals/6A*.html)).

In addition to this primary function, the priesthood also had two other
more general roles: to organise certain games and festivals, and to
conduct or oversee public sacrifices. Typically, these happened in
unison. As previously noted, the *quindecemviri* of 17 BCE oversaw the
*ludi saeculares* and conducted a number of sacrifices during the event.
An inscription from Campania (Italy) referred to as the *Fasti
Praenestini* (fig. 5) also records that, after Augustus' calendar
reforms of 8 CE, the *quindecemviri* and the other great priestly
colleges "\[annually\] sacrificed victims to the godhead of Augustus at
the altar" on the 17^th^ of January.

The *quindecemviri* may also have conducted sacrifices outside of
festival contexts. Dio Cassius records the *quindecemvir* Potitus
Valerius Messalla conducting a public sacrifice in Rome to celebrate
Augustus' triumphal return from Pharsalus in 29 BCE ([Dio
51.21](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/51*.html)).
However, Valerius was also a consul suffect in this year, and it is
difficult to discern in what capacity he is conducting this sacrifice. A
similar issue is seen with the evidence from Leptis Magna (fig. 6) in
relation to building dedications (a ritual which typically involved a
sacrifice). Epigraphic evidence attests to a certain Quintus Marcius
Barea overseeing two dedicatory sacrifices between 41-43 CE in Leptis
Magna ([IRT
273](https://edh-www.adw.uni-heidelberg.de/edh/inschrift/HD021094); [CIL
08 6987](https://edh-www.adw.uni-heidelberg.de/edh/inschrift/HD030003)),
but Marcius was also governor of Africa during this time, so we are left
with the same issue. Nonetheless, this could be evidence of the
*quindecemviri* exercising their powers overseas.

Conclusions
-----------

The *quindecemviri sacris faciundis* was evidently an important
priesthood in Julio-Claudian Rome, comprising of numerous illustrious
individuals who often held a number of important positions concurrently
with their priesthood, or prior to their admission. Moreover, the
prolific nature of their careers leads to issues of ambiguity within the
evidence concerning the priesthood's roles. Roles which, in summary,
were to care for and interpret the Sibylline books, and to organise,
conduct, and oversee religious events and public sacrifices.
